📖 Runtime Hooks for Add-on management proposal (#6418)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20220414-runtime-hooks.md

The hooks defined in this proposal are going to model common events in the Cluster lifecycle and we assume that in the future they may be used for other use cases beyond add-on management. 

### Goals

* Identify a set of Runtime Hooks that enable management of the entire add-on lifecycle 
* Define the OpenAPI specification of these Runtime Hooks
* Document when the corresponding Runtime Extensions are called
* Provide guidelines for developers implementing a corresponding Runtime Extension

### Non-Goals

* Defining all possible Runtime Hooks in Cluster API; this proposal defines only a subset of hooks required for add-on orchestration.
* Define a full add-on management solution or define detailed steps for solving add-on related problems like CPI migration from in-tree to out-of-tree; this proposal is focused only in providing the foundational capabilities to do so. 

### Future work

* Improve the hooks defined in this proposal to better support use cases beyond add-on management 

## Proposal

> This proposal adds a set of Runtime Hooks specifically designed for Cluster created from a ClusterClass and thus leveraging the idea of managed topology. 

Reviewer: I'd expect most of the scenarios to be handled/triggered by the core operational primitives i.e Cluster/Machine CR/controller regardless of them being managed by a topology or not.

So I think before reasoning about managed topology hooks we need to clearly define the behaviour and hooks for the core Cluster and Machines lifecycle, then we can add layers atop where we think it makes sense e.g managed topology to satisfy specific use cases.

Reviewer 2: IMO the scenarios we're talking about here can't easily be handled by the core primitives:
- The upgrade flow **BeforeClusterUpgrade**, **AfterControlPlaneUpgrade** and **AfterClusterUpgrade** has no obvious point of control outside ClusterClass.
- **BeforeClusterCreate** can't meaningfully block e.g. Machine creation for non-ClusterClass clusters.
-  **BeforeClusterDelete** or **AfterControlPlaneInitialized** could work. 

Do you have another idea on how these hooks could work without using the Topology controller as a point of control?

Reviewer: >The upgrade flow BeforeClusterUpgrade, AfterControlPlaneUpgrade and AfterClusterUpgrade has no obvious point of control outside ClusterClass.

I agree that for scenarios where ordering/state between cp and Nodes or the view of both as a whole is required then topology is possibly the right lifecycle to hook into. I'm fine having this in topology, my concern is more about the fact that atm it is not possible to prove and elaborate or document "why" because the core primitives hooks are not defined anywhere, they basically don't exist and so they can't be referenced nor reason about. So I'm concern that we might not be able to make the right decisions without them being defined first.
I think at the very minimum something like your comment above should be elaborated as part of this proposal to justify the proposed hooks.

Reviewer 3: that's a fair point.
I think that the rest of this paragraph already makes a good job in explaining the why, but it could really help if we add some examples from @killianmuldoon  comment above to make everything more concrete.
I'm making a suggestion below to address this

Author: I have updated the section about why the Managed Cluster were chosen for this with @fabriziopandini's suggestion. It adds more on why these hooks go into the topology controller.

The main reason for this choice is because a managed topology has a set of capabilities required for lifecycle hooks implementation:

* A managed topology has the overarching view of the entire Cluster (vs other components in CAPI which are limited to controlling single resources or a subset of them).
* A managed topology already has the capability to control all resources in a Cluster, thus making it possible to orchestrate lifecycle workflows like e.g. upgrades.

> Please note that this is especially relevant because it allows treating the cluster lifecycle as a state machine no matter the underlying controller being based on level-triggered reconcile loops.

Reviewer 3: suggestion to address https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/6418/files#r869608110

```suggestion
In practice, if we look at the six lifecycle hooks introduced by this proposal, we should recongnize that four of them cannot be implemented outside of the topology controller because there is no viable point to be used in an alternative (BeforeClusterCreate, BeforeClusterUpgrade, AfterControlPlaneUpgrade, and AfterClusterUpgrade). 

Also, by working in the topology controller it is possible to implement hooks allowing to block the cluster from transitioning from one state to another, which is a capability required to properly orchestrate the addon lifecycle.
```

###  User Stories

> These user stories are based on a concrete example of an add-on - a metrics database -  to illustrate the use of each Runtime Hook.

Reviewer: for being able to reason thoroughly about the right hooks/abstractions can we add a few more concrete examples in addition to the metrics database?

Author: @enxebre Do you have any suggestions/pointers for example we can add here?

As a developer of an add-ons orchestration solution:

* **Before a Cluster is Created** I want to automatically check if enough disk space is available for allocation to the cluster for persistent storage of collected metrics values.
* **After the Control Plane** **is Initialized** I want to automatically install a metrics database and associated add-ons in the workload cluster.
* **Before the Cluster is Upgraded** I want to install a new version of the metrics database with a new version of the custom metrics apiservice to interact directly with the Kubernetes apiserver.
* **After the ControlPlane is Upgraded** I want to automatically check that the new version of the custom metrics apiservice is working and correctly fulfilled by my metrics database.
* **After the Cluster is Upgraded** I want to install new versions of metrics collectors to each upgraded node in the cluster.
* **Before the Cluster is Deleted** I want to automatically back up persistent volumes used by the metrics database.

### Runtime hook definitions

Below is a description for the Runtime Hooks introduced by this proposal.

![runtime-hooks](images/runtime-hooks/runtime-hooks.png)

#### Before Cluster Create

> This hook is called after the Cluster object has been created by the user, immediately before all the objects which are part of a Cluster topology(*) are going to be created. Runtime Extension implementers can use this hook to determine/prepare add-ons for the Cluster and block the creation of those objects until everything is ready. 

Reviewer: Refer to https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/6418/files#r864715008

##### Example Request:

```yaml
apiVersion: hooks.runtime.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: BeforeClusterCreateRequest

> cluster:

Reviewer: where can I see the full pseudo CR definition of a BeforeClusterCreateRequest kind?

Author: The full spec of each request and response object is included in the OpenAPI spec attached in this PR.

  apiVersion: cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1
  kind: Cluster
  metadata:
   name: test-cluster
   namespace: test-ns
  spec:
   ...
  status:
   ...
```

##### Example Response:

```yaml
apiVersion: hooks.runtime.cluster.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: BeforeClusterCreateResponse
status: Success

> message: "error message if status == Failure"

Reviewer: what's status in this context?

Reviewer 2: The status field in the type can be Success or Failure. If it's marked as success there should be a message adding context in this message field.

retryAfterSeconds: 10
```

> For additional details, refer to the [Draft OpenAPI spec](https://editor.swagger.io/?url=https://gist.githubusercontent.com/ykakarap/6a58d976df90928cdb31768125d73613/raw/8ce6175060039c2fb7b3ea9a091d712228f56852/lifecycle-hooks-openapi-2.yaml). 

Reviewer: please let's include this file in the PR and update the reference.

Reviewer 2: Good idea

Author: done.

This and similar solutions based on scripting or git ops approaches are considered inadequate for comprehensive, integrated add-on management as they have limited insight into the state of the Cluster and can not easily influence reconciliation based on add-on state.

More details about this in the [Cluster Addon Proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TdbfXC2_Hhg0mH7-7hXcT1Gg8h6oXKrKbnJqbpFFvjw/edit).

### OpenAPI spec implementation alternatives

For the implementation detail of Open API spec, we considered following alternative approaches:
#### Adding Cluster info to request vs providing only the Cluster name

In the proposed Open API specification for request type we have a full Cluster object. We considered an alternative of only including the Cluster name and namespace to reduce the size of the message. It was rejected based on the assumption that most extensions will require at least some additional information from the Cluster. Sending the full object reduces calls to the API server.

#### Embedding CAPI types in request vs using runtime.RawExtension

> In the proposed Open API specification we are including the Cluster API object in requests. We considered using runtime.RawExtension in order to avoid having to bump the version of lifecycle hooks when bumping the version of the CAPI types. It was rejected as sending another version of the CAPI type via runtime.RawExtension would always be a breaking change. Embedding the type directly makes the version of the API used explicit.

Reviewer 3: Thinking a little bit more about this, we should consider how to trigger down-conversion of the cluster object when calling an older version of the hook.
Most probably this requires some thinking/experimenting about implementation details, but I think the current working assumption should not be put in discussion for this

Author: Good point about the down-conversion of the Cluster object. This will need more experimenting to identify the correct implementation for this. Shall I drop the `Embedding CAPI types in request vs using runtime.RawExtension` section from the proposal?

Reviewer 3: No, let's stick to the current working assumptions, but we should track this issue to be investigated

---
title: Runtime Hooks for Add-on Management
authors:
  - "@killianmuldoon"
  - "@ykakarap"

> reviewers:

Reviewer 4: would be great to also geat a review from @jackfrancis and/or @Jont828 since they are working on the add-on story via https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TdbfXC2_Hhg0mH7-7hXcT1Gg8h6oXKrKbnJqbpFFvjw/edit#heading=h.cbd41fsf3rhi

Reviewer 5: @jackfrancis @Jont828 Would be great if you can take a look if you have some time, thx! :)

Reviewer 3: +1 @jackfrancis @Jont828 work could really benefit from lifecycle hook to manage edge cases like 
- addon to be upgraded before the cluster itself 
- addon to be upgraded right after the entire CP is upgraded
- addon to be upgraded only after the entire cluster is upgraded
- "blocking" cluster upgrade before an addon upgrade is completed
- addon cleanup before the cluster deletion
and probably more

Note: we are not yet there in the prototype work, but I guess we will get there soon

Reviewer 6: Sounds good let me take a look!

    * [Security Model](#security-model)
    * [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
      * [Runtime Extension blocks Cluster lifecycle indefinitely](#runtime-extension-blocks-cluster-lifecycle-indefinitely)
* [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  * [External components watching CAPI resources without hooks](#external-components-watching-capi-resources-without-hooks)
  * [OpenAPI spec implementation alternatives](#openapi-spec-implementation-alternatives)
    * [Adding Cluster info to request vs providing only the Cluster name](#adding-cluster-info-to-request-vs-providing-only-the-cluster-name)
    * [Embedding CAPI types in request vs using runtime.RawExtension](#embedding-capi-types-in-request-vs-using-runtimerawextension)
* [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
    * [Cluster API version upgrade](#clusterapi-version-upgrade)
    * [Kubernetes version upgrade](#kubernetes-version-upgrade)
* [Additional Details](#additional-details)
    * [Test Plan](#test-plan)
    * [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
    * [Version Skew Strategy](#version-skew-strategy)
* [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

> Refer to the [Cluster API Book Glossary](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/glossary.html).

Reviewer 4: Might be worth to define what we intend as "add-on" in this proposal. Add-on is a very overloaded word in k8s that can mean different things depending on who you talk to...

Reviewer 5: In the [Cluster API Add-Ons Orchestration](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TdbfXC2_Hhg0mH7-7hXcT1Gg8h6oXKrKbnJqbpFFvjw/edit#) proposal it's defined as:

> Add-on: an application that extends the functionality of Kubernetes.

Sounds very generic, but I assume it's good enough for the purpose of the current proposal

## Summary

> This proposal introduces a set of Runtime Hooks designed for allowing the implementation of add-on orchestration solutions on top of Cluster API.

Reviewer 3: I'm proposing to expand the summary a little bit in order to address @CecileRobertMichon comment

>  ... it's unclear to me from reading this proposal what the relationship is between this and the Cluster Addons proposal which also seems to be moving forward. I also think we should make it more clear that these hooks don't have to be used for addon management, they could be leveraged for anything, even if the primary motivation of the proposal is addon management. 

```suggestion
This proposal introduces a set of Runtime Hooks designed for providing the foundation for the implementation of add-on orchestration solutions on top of Cluster API.

However, given that the hooks defined in this proposal are going to model common events in the Cluster lifecycle they could be used for other use cases beyond add-on management, but for the sake of having a focused and actionable scope, we are not exploring those option in this document. 
```

I would also take an AI to work with @jackfrancis @Jont828 to clarify in their document how the Cluster Addons provider for helm could take care of the Hooks introduced in this document

The ability to orchestrate add-ons in line with events in the cluster lifecycle is becoming a requirement for many CAPI users, but in order to make this possible a mechanism to plug into the cluster lifecycle is required. This proposal introduces a set of Runtime Hooks designed to meet the need for add-on management orchestration including:

* Operations for installing add-ons during the cluster provisioning workflow
* Operations for upgrading add-ons during the cluster upgrade workflow
* Operations for handling add-ons during the cluster deletion workflow

Runtime Hooks enable the Cluster Lifecycle to trigger these processes based on the current state of the cluster, allowing them to start after some state has been reached or waiting for them to complete before moving on with Cluster-wide operations such as Cluster creation or deletion.

Once these hooks are in place, it will be possible to build a comprehensive add-on orchestration solution on top of Cluster API that can leverage external tools such as helm, kapp, ArgoCD, flux or eventually CRS as an alternative.

> The hooks defined in this proposal are going to model common events in the Cluster lifecycle and we assume that in the future they may be used for other use cases beyond add-on management. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Given that is now moved in the summary

### Goals

* Identify a set of Runtime Hooks that enable management of the entire add-on lifecycle 
* Define the OpenAPI specification of these Runtime Hooks
* Document when the corresponding Runtime Extensions are called
* Provide guidelines for developers implementing a corresponding Runtime Extension

### Non-Goals

* Defining all possible Runtime Hooks in Cluster API; this proposal defines only a subset of hooks required for add-on orchestration.
* Define a full add-on management solution or define detailed steps for solving add-on related problems like CPI migration from in-tree to out-of-tree; this proposal is focused only in providing the foundational capabilities to do so. 

### Future work

> * Improve the hooks defined in this proposal to better support use cases beyond add-on management 

Reviewer 4: Just to clarify, does this mean introducing new hooks or modify the existing ones?

Reviewer 2: I think new hooks are outside of the scope of this proposal (unless a new hook is needed for add-on management). This is designed to cover over any changes that need to be made as we understand the add-on story and how suitable these hooks are and may involve e.g. changing the response / request types.

If we need a new hook specifically for add-on management (hopefully not :slightly_smiling_face: ) that could be part of the future work in the proposal - other hooks should have their own proposals / PRs IMO

Reviewer 5: The current sentence reads like future work is to improve the hooks **currently** defined in this proposal so they are also cover uses-cases apart from add-on management.

Let's try to rephrase slightly so it's 100% clear what we mean.

Reviewer 3: If we can rephrase ok, but IMO we can also remove this given that it is kind of implicit that this feature can be improved in the future if other use cases add more requirements for this set of runtime hooks

Author: I am +1 to dropping this section.

Following recommendations are especially relevant:

* [Blocking and non Blocking](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/b48a6ed07ac2bd353f99000270510369f4baa1a5/docs/proposals/20220221-runtime-SDK.md#blocking-hooks)
* [Error management](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/b48a6ed07ac2bd353f99000270510369f4baa1a5/docs/proposals/20220221-runtime-SDK.md#error-management)
* [Avoid dependencies](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/b48a6ed07ac2bd353f99000270510369f4baa1a5/docs/proposals/20220221-runtime-SDK.md#avoid-dependencies)

###  Security Model

For the general Runtime Extension security model please refer to the [developer guide in the Runtime SDK proposal](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/75b39db545ae439f4f6203b5e07496d3b0a6aa75/docs/proposals/20220221-runtime-SDK.md#security-model).

###  Risks and Mitigations

####  Runtime Extension blocks Cluster lifecycle indefinitely

Cluster lifecycle can be blocked indefinitely when a Runtime Extension either blocks or fails indefinitely. Mitigation:

> * A Runtime Extension should be extensively unit and e2e tested to ensure it behaves as expected.

Reviewer 4: I'm not convinced adding test to ensure the risk doesn't happen is a real mitigation... Maybe we should instead consider what happens if it does fail. How do we alert the user? Is there a timeout option available to proceed after a certain time? How can an operator unblock the cluster lifecycle via manual intervention?

Reviewer 5: > How do we alert the user?

I think that is definitely something we can & should do (and describe here a bit). Our current plan was to surface this at least via conditions.  I assume this would then also propagate to some metrics exposed by cluster-api-state-metrics later on.

> Is there a timeout option available to proceed after a certain time?

Currently not.

> How can an operator unblock the cluster lifecycle via manual intervention?

Once a user saw that the cluster lifecycle is blocked via conditions / metrics (/alerts) he can either remove the corresponding ExtensionConfig or modify it's namespaceSelector so it doesn't match the blocked cluster anymore. Good point to mention that here.

Reviewer 3: +1 to make it explicit that we are currently thinking at condition metrics, but in the future we can explore things like circuit breakers or timeout as suggested by @CecileRobertMichon

> As future work, we will explore more options like circuit breaker and timeout to unblock reconciliation.

Reviewer 7: How much extra scope would it be to add global (configurable) timeout enforcement to all runtime hooks? There are similar baked-in defaults to various k8s runtimes (20 minute context deadline wrappers, for example) that might be worth copying here to better ensure against forward progress deadlocks.

Reviewer 2: I don't think the extra scope is the major issue here so much as user expectations - if users are setting RuntimeExtensions can we properly capture what users would expect from the system with a global timeout? 

It's something we're thinking about, but it's hard to design a good solution without having the system in place (at least minimally) and getting a good understanding for how it might be used and how it will interact with the other processes / reconciliation loops going on in Cluster API.

Reviewer 7: Thanks for the thoughtful responses!

## Alternatives

Alternatives to Runtime Hooks for comprehensive add-on management in Cluster API include:

### External components watching CAPI resources without hooks

This is the current pattern used by Cluster Resource Set. The implementers can only react to changes on CAPI resources, e.g. a Cluster being created, but they have no control over the cluster lifecycle.

This and similar solutions based on scripting or git ops approaches are considered inadequate for comprehensive, integrated add-on management as they have limited insight into the state of the Cluster and can not easily influence reconciliation based on add-on state.

> More details about this in the [Cluster Addon Proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TdbfXC2_Hhg0mH7-7hXcT1Gg8h6oXKrKbnJqbpFFvjw/edit).

Reviewer 4: it's unclear to me from reading this section if the Cluster Addon Proposal is considered an alternative or just some place where more details on the current pattern are provided.

Would be great if the proposal could make it clear what is the relationship between this work and Cluster Addon work since there seems to be a lot of overlap.

Reviewer 5: My impression is that in the current proposal we only define the Runtime Hooks which are necessary to build Addon management while the linked proposal builds on top of those hooks to actually implement addon management.

Reviewer 3: We should improve this sentence into 

```suggestion
More details about why watching Cluster API resources without hooks is not considered a valid alternative can be found in the [Cluster Addon Proposal](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TdbfXC2_Hhg0mH7-7hXcT1Gg8h6oXKrKbnJqbpFFvjw/edit).
```

(The Cluster Addon Proposal is just someplace where more details on the current pattern are provided; also my expectation is that @Jont828 and @jackfrancis will start using the hooks defined in this proposal as soon as possible to better orchestrate the addon lifecycle; I still have to add details about how/what problems we can solve in that document).
